---
title: Writing
author: ielliott95
permalink: /writing
tags:
    - self-improvement
    - philosophy
---

I think writing can help us think better.

Not the act of writing itself, but a particular writing process where you take
an idea, think deeply about exactly how you want to express it, and then write
it down. I think the process itself provides part of the value, as a form of
"brain exercise", but also the end product, as a foundation upon which we can
build more robust ideas.

This post is a funny self-referential exercise where I explore what I'm writing
about as I write it.

---

When I have a thought, I feel pretty confident about it. It seems real and solid
and it feels like I understand it. But most of the time this is an illusion.
If I try to go deeper and ask myself questions like "Why do you think that?" or "Can you
elaborate?" I often find it hard to come up with an answer. When this happens I
say my idea lacks 'substance' or 'structure'. There are no justifications or
consequences bundled along with the thought; it's kind of empty. Substance is important for
ideas to be meaningful - at best, an insubstantial idea is a platitude, and at
worse, outright nonsense. So if I have an idea, I'd like to give it some meaning
(or figure out that it is actually as empty as it seems).

If I want to uncover the structure of an idea, I need to think more about it. I need to
ask questions and explore perspectives. I'll have a stack of relevant sub-ideas
that all need to be related to the larger idea. If I tried to do all this in my
head then I wouldn't get very far. My working memory is really tiny compared to
the ideas I want to tackle. So my first use for writing is as a tool of thought:
I can store all my relevant thoughts onto a page and devote my full attention to
the particular problem at hand. Sound reasoning is an important component of
'thinking better', and writing enables me to devote more attention to that
process. Not only can I reason better, but I also have the freedom to reason
*more*, because I can explore more sub-ideas without getting lost. Writing
allows me to increase the intensity and volume of reasoning, which seems like it
should lead to greater improvement in the area.

In addition to being a personal tool, writing also is used to transfer
information between two different minds, and I think being conscious of this is
an important part of the process. To me, writing seems like a kind of
telepathy. It's a way to transmit thoughts between minds via a physical medium.
But high fidelity transmission isn't guaranteed just because you wrote
*something* down. We need to put words together in a way that makes it more
likely for the telepathy to be successful. I think that to succeed at this
sort of language game requires a clear understanding of the subject matter. When
you understand what you're talking about, you can play with the descriptions you use
and compare their accuracy, then use the best description in your final work.
But if you don't understand what you're
talking about then there's not much to measure your words against in the first
place. I think that focusing on communication forces us to search for
the 'essence' of an idea, which further engages our critical thinking abilities.

My hope is that putting all this effort into exploring and refining an idea
creates new intellectual opportunities in the future. Kind of like taking blobs
of clay and forging them into bricks: if you want to build a tower,
you want to start with the foundation and work up, brick by brick. You won't get
very high by stacking clay. Similarly, this
writing process might be refining ideas in a way that is necessary to make
further intellectual progress, and that without it, there would be a much lower
ceiling on what we can achieve. 

Having written all this down, I think a summary of this process is: the [deliberate
practise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Practice_(learning_method)#Deliberate_practice)
of organising thought, critical thinking, and effective communication. Writing
serves dual purposes: as a tool it enables us to better explore ideas, and treating it
as an end in itself requires us to better understand those ideas.
