---
title: Learning a Craft
permalink: /learning-a-craft
tags:
    - self-improvement
---

I remember when I first learned about computer programming, around 2008 or 2009.
I wanted to make games, and asked a search engine. Apparently computer graphics
was way too hard, so I decided I wanted to create browser-based static HTML
games and text-based roguelikes. Having learned that PHP and MySQL exist, I sat
down and brainstormed a setting, classes and roles for characters, and all the
other things that come with fantasy RPGs.

Soon after, I realised I wasn't capable of building any of it.

At the time, even the simplest programs were incredibly confusing, and the
complexity of a browser game was far beyond me. I'm lucky that I didn't give up
on programming after realising I couldn't build any of my cool ideas. For me,
just being able to make computers do things was enthralling, and my learning
became self-propelled &mdash; games be damned.

Contrast this with how I've recently approached another activity that I'm
interested in, but very bad at: creative writing. For a while now I've wanted to
learn how to tell stories, and this has been my process so far:

> "I want to write stuff."
>
>
> "Not just any old stuff, but *cool* stuff; interesting stuff."
>
>
> "But I don't have any cool ideas!"
>
>
> "Guess I won't write about anything then."

In other words: I've learned *nothing*, because I haven't done anything. I've
been paralysed by this desire to only make 'interesting' things. It's easy
to imagine that other people have been stuck in similar situations with
programming: someone wants to learn to code, but doesn't know what to build, or
only wants to work on seriously cool and ground-breaking projects. And I'm sure
it's not only programming; it seems there's a common set of problems facing
people who take up a craft. To address this, I'm going to think of advice that I
would give to beginner programmers and generalise it.

## Drop your standards and shelve your ideas

At the start of the learning process, you have barely any ability. This means
that by most standards, you will produce a lot of terrible, unskilled work. But
that's okay, because at this stage each piece of work is a step toward
improvement. Each thing you make exists so that you can figure out how to make
the *next* one better. Your standards, or
[taste](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2wLP0izeJE), can still point you in
directions for improvement, but your mistakes and shortcomings are not *bad
things*.

If you have any grand designs, put them on hold. Chances are you don't have the
ability to see them through right now. Sometimes lofty ideas can help you figure
out which areas to study &ndash; if you dream of making a first person shooter then
you should definitely learn about 3D graphics. In general, though, I think it
will help to put the big ideas aside until you're more skilled.

## Make EVERYTHING

When I started coding, I made calculator and to-do list apps, tiny
database-backed webapps and 2D space shooters and brick breakers. None of this
was remotely novel; it was a challenge just to repeat what others had built
before me. Even though I wasn't building anything original, I was still creating
something that *I* had never made before, which was a huge learning experience.
Even simple programs, like a calculator, require important fundamental skills
that I didn't have. I encountered problems that had been solved countless times
by others, but that didn't diminish the value of solving them for myself.

Getting into this mindset seems especially difficult in 'creative' endeavours
like writing, game programming, or visual art. It feels like in these areas,
there's a big emphasis on being unique, imaginative, and innovative. While this
is a fine standard for experts, it's the wrong way for beginners to approach a
craft. Making shiny new stuff comes later; right now you need to re-make old
stuff.

Replicating past work doesn't mean to copy things out line for line. Copy the
idea, and figure out how to fill in the details yourself. When I sat down and
said "I'm going to write a brick breaking game", I didn't go and cut sections of
code out of other similar games. I took the un-original concept, broke it into
smaller components, and figured out how to make each of those bits. How do I
display a ball on the screen? How do I make it move? How do I make it bounce?
Each sub-problem required original thinking on my part, and it's this original
thinking that drove my improvement.

## Find joy in the process

Motivation is really important for making consistent progress in a skill, but
not all motivations are equally effective. I think the least sustainable
motivational source (but most common for beginners) is 'wanting to make
something good'. If this is your main motivation, then you'll be in a constant
state of discouragement &mdash; every piece of work a reminder of your lack of
ability. These little negatives slowly add up until you resent the activity.

A better motivational source is 'to improve at something'. With this
perspective, you feel accomplishment whenever you notice that your skills have
increased, which happens often for beginners who practise regularly. But
improvement-based motivation isn't enough on its own; there are periods where
you won't notice improvement, but it's important to practise anyway.

The most important and fundamental source of motivation comes from enjoying the
activity itself. If you enjoy the craft regardless of standards of quality or
ability, then it doesn't matter how 'bad' your work is in the beginning, because
producing it is a joy in itself. I've spent days and sometimes weeks stuck
trying to make my code work the way I intended, but that's all okay because it's
part of the process. At the end of the day I just like making computers do
things.

---

I mainly wrote this for myself, to get a bit of a handle on why I find writing
so difficult and how I can make it easier. I think it has helped. The next thing
I write (not on here) will likely be the literary equivalent of a command-line
calculator program &mdash; and that's okay.

*All this 'advice' may seem obvious to some, or lacking in original insight, and
I'm* sure *other people have written about these things to greater effect than me.
But that's beside the point, isn't it?*
